Welcome to Metabolic Matters podcast
where we embark on conversations with
thought leaders, disruptors, change
agents, and passionate souls. Together,
we'll delve into what truly matters to
them. And you'll learn how to metabolize
this newfound wisdom so you can
transform your own metabolic health.
Now, let's meet today's guest.
>> Travis Kristopherson is a captivating
figure at the intersection of science,
research, and the relentless pursuit of
understanding one of humanity's most
formidable adversaries, cancer. With a
passion that borders on obsession,
Christopherson has established himself
as a prominent science writer and a
dedicated researcher, earning widespread
recognition for his unwavering
commitment to exploring the fascinating
realm of metabolic oncology.
In a world inundated with complex
medical jargon and bewildering
scientific breakthroughs, Travis stands
as a beacon of clarity and insight. He
possesses a remarkable ability to
distill intricate concepts into
accessible narratives that resonate with
both experts and lay people alike. His
writing serves as a bridge between the
esoteric world of metabolic science and
the urgent need for innovative cancer
treatments, offering a lifelong, excuse
me, offering a lifeline of understanding
to those grappling with this devastating
disease.
Travis's journey into the world of
metabolic oncology began with a
deeprooted curiosity and a personal
connection to the struggle against
cancer. His quest to unearth
unconventional approaches to cancer
therapy has led him to engage with
cutting edge research, forging a path
that challenges conventional wisdom and
ignites hope for those affected by this
formidable adversary. As a metabolic
oncology enthusiast, Travis's work
transcends mere fascination. It
represents a call to action, an
invitation to explore the tantalizing
possibilities hidden within the complex
metabolic pathways that underline
underly cancer's insidious growth.
Through his writing, his research, and
his unwavering commitment, Travis
empowers us to question the status quo,
inspiring a new era of hope and
innovation in the battle against cancer.
In the following discussion, we'll delve
deep into the remarkable journey of this
science writer and researcher as he
leads us on a captivating exploration of
metabolic oncologyy's potential to
redefine our understanding of cancer and
to revolutionize its treatment. Brought
to you by Keto Mojo. If you're on a
ketogenic or low carb high-fat diet, you
will want to measure your ketones and
blood sugar to ensure you're staying on
track. And that's exactly where Keto
Mojo glucose and ketone meter comes in.
The Keto Mojo meter empowers you to take
control of your health. It takes the
guesswork out of being in ketosis. It
provides fast and accurate readings,
helping you to fine-tune and ensure
you're getting the results you're aiming
for. Ketosis aids in the treatment of
cancer, diabetes, and other chronic
metabolic diseases, while also providing
the metabolic adaptability needed for a
healthier life. When it comes to
metabolic health, always test, assess,
and address. Never guess, and ensure
you're making the right choices for your
health and well-being with a reliable
Keto Mojo blood glucose and ketone
meter. Ketomojo is giving listeners a
15% discount on blood glucose and ketone
meter kits using the code Nisha 15.
That's nasa15.
Visit keto-mojo.com.
keto o-moj.com
and take the first step toward taking
control of your ketogenic diet and your
health. Don't guess, test with a keto
meter.
>> Well, welcome everybody. I'm incredibly
excited about this conversation we're
about to have today. Um, I should
probably I've given you a little
introduction about who my guest is
today, but I want to tell you another
little story about the very first time I
met Travis.
We were standing in line. Do you
remember that giant line at a conference
in Vegas? Was this 2000 end of 2014 or
beginning of 2015?
Can't quite remember.
>> Was it Reno or Vegas? Reno, right?
>> Was it Reno? It was at a It was at a big
casino though.
>> Some place where there's gambling. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah.
>> Super big casino. Super long snaky line
at the check-in for this big cancer
conference of all things. Um and a
casino in Reno. And I don't know, I'm a
I'm a couple people behind Travis. And
somehow he just looks sort of familiar
to me. And I'm assuming a lot of the
people there for this conference because
it's a big it was maybe 1,200 people for
this conference. We assume that probably
some people are there, but he had I
think you had it in your arms or somehow
I recognized your face from the back of
your book. But I had literally within a
week or two of that conference just read
Tripping Over the Truth
>> and
you didn't know that. And so you're and
I'm like I feel like everyone else might
see a famous person say walking down the
street in LA or something and they get
excited and they might pull out their
camera and feel a little fan girl. I
felt no different than if I was seeing
like, I don't know, Elvis Presley, you
know, on the street somewhere. I started
getting so excited and also nervous of
do I do I go up and say something to
this person? Do I, you know, is this
going to be weird, but I'm going to do
it anyway because that's my nature.
I walked up to you and I'm like, are you
Travis Kristofferson? And you looked at
me sort of like, I think you're a crazy
stalker lady. Luckily, my husband was
somewhere back in the line as well, and
he also became a crazy stalker to you as
well. But when I told you I I you know,
when you said yes and I told you I just
read your book, do you remember what you
said to me?
>> I do not remember.
>> You said, "Oh, great. You and maybe two
other people."
>> At that time, I I had huge imposttor
syndrome. I did not and I don't think
the book had really sold well at that
point. It had just come out and I had no
expectations. I didn't know I really
didn't know how many people had read it
or if anybody had read it yet.
>> And that was such my joy that like I
said I can't remember if it if that
conference was like in the latter part
of your book had come out I think in
October 2014. Um, I think you
self-published it to start
>> and you know the title of the book for
those of you who missed the intro,
tripping over the truth, how the
metabolic theory of cancer is
overturning one of medicine's most
entrenched paradigms. So, a compelling
title. I don't even remember how it
landed in my must-read list, but it did.
I inhaled it in about 24 hours. Then I'm
lucky enough to be in a line in Reno to
uh meet and introduce myself to Travis
and for him to realize that, you know,
there was someone at least one person
out there who had read his book. What's
so wild, Travis, is like you said, like
you had this imposture syndrome. people
didn't know about it and I was losing my
ever loving mind because as I've
described to people before tripping over
the truth book is as if you took you
know Sudar Sedarta Mukerji's book um the
emperor of all malades very heady
historical perspective of the history
the biology biography of cancer and you
took Thomas's book cancer as a metabolic
disease and You cliffnote each of them
into this beautiful synergistic piece.
This little book baby is tripping over
the truth. And I was like,
has no way been so excited about. It
would still take another year or so
before you became more of the household
name that you are in my world, in our
circle that you are today. But your book
then did get picked up by Chelsea Green
Publishing, who's also the publisher of
our book, The Metabolic Approach to
Cancer. and it got out in hardback and
suddenly you and I got to see each other
at a lot more conferences and boy howdy
has it been go full steam ever since. So
perhaps why don't you pick it up from
there? Like what happened from that
moment of you being sort of your your
perceived nobody to now one of the
thought leaders and and most quoted
authors on topics such as metabolic
oncology, ketone bodies, and even the
future of health care in general. How
what what's been going on there? Yeah,
it was, you know, I think like you said,
it was a collision of timing because it
was it was a book maybe of of Sedarth
Mukerji's book and Tom's book because I
had read Sedar's book I can't maybe a
few months before and then I had read
Tom's book.
>> Yeah. And it was at this moment in my
life where I I you know probably midlife
crisisish time where I needed something
new and I'd always dabbled in writing
and that was a perfect perfect topic and
I think it was just you know serendipity
luck that from that moment there's been
a lot more attention to this topic right
and it also helps when you write a book
where there's when you're the people in
it are interested in promoting the ideas
Tom Safe Dominic you know you everybody
So, it it could have easily, I think,
just fallen into nobody read this
self-published book to there was enough
luck and inertia that it it, you know,
it sold fairly well.
>> I love it. We we we've heard this
concept of of luck uh show up in our
world often. I mean, I love that Travis,
you know, is is talking about that he
was lucky that this showed up. There's
also these conversation which I don't
believe. I mean first of all if you read
your work what is so amazing Travis who
I don't know you have to know this that
to take someone who has a scientific
mind a scientific training and very
heady con concepts and be able to write
them in the way that is engaging for
even the most you know fundamental lay
person that has no medical scientific
background whatsoever and have a story
being told that is compelling and draws
people in to turn every single page to
find out what's going to happen next and
then learn along the way. That is a
gift.
>> That well it lended itself to that too,
right? Because of Warberg who is this
character and and this idea, you know,
this redemption story of him being
completely disregarded. Tom his him
being slowly rekindled back to life at
at Pete Peterson's lab and Johns Hopkins
and Tom Safe and then you know and it's
got it really goes but you're right
humans are storytellers and if you can
bring it into that format to where the
characters become people and you see how
science works and you see this sort of
historical unfolding of all this inertia
and why things happen certain ways
versus just a textbook of information,
right? But but what this interesting
thing to me is this story that ended so
say 2014 when the book came out in these
characters like Sedarth Mukerji who has
now started this company called Faith
Therapeutics which is a diet-based
metabolism company for oncology Bert
Vogelstein who was at the head of the
cancer genome atlas right the poster boy
for for the somatic mutation theory of
cancer is now has a company called cage
pharma which is three bromo pyuvate, a
metabolically acting drug. So, it it's
it still keeps it circles back. There's
there's even more threads that are
coming coming due.
>> I was so happy you brought up those two
individuals because that's just it is
some of these people that you and I look
to their work. We've we've learned from
them, we've studied from them, we've
even kind of I don't know fought against
them whether they knew it or not, you
know, in some way some of the ideas that
were put out there where even people
like Dr. Dr. McCary started out sort of
trying to disprove the metabolic
approach to cancer, the metabolic theory
of cancer, is now really doing some of
the really amazing groundbreaking
research in it. And the very person
Boglestein, I'm so happy you mentioned
him because I used that word luck very
intentionally. He is one of the authors
on several papers, I think what 2011 and
again in 2017 that just said again, but
you know guys, sorry, cancer is just bad
luck. It's just a luck of the draw. just
a Russian roulette. You got nothing at
it. And literally as it's coming out
this side of the mouth, we're investing
in patenting this side of the mouth,
which is all about the metabolics of
cancer. So, can you speak about what
you've seen in the in the change, like
why do you think these folks that were
so
attached and on the, you know, not
willing to get off the sinking Titanic
of the somatic mutation theory of
cancer, the genetic only cause of
cancer? Why do you think they've now
sort of jumped onto the life raft and
yet still aren't speaking to that fact?
Like where they're still kind of like
just hush hush pretend no one will
notice as we as we swim away from the
Titanic.
>> Can what do you think's going on? I you
know if you look at the way science
unfolds always it's like it's this slow
process and you can look at so many
examples of that like look at Peter
Mitchell who proposed the um how does a
cell generate m ATP and there was
debates for decades it was called the
oxfos wars where Peter Mitchell proposed
this idea that the mitochondria are
creating this this gradient and and
protons come down through this machinery
that creates ATP and everyone thought he
was insane and literally fights would
break out at these conferences, you
know, and and and he was actually good
friends with Pete Peterson and Dr. Co
>> who are who are in my book and they
would counsel him in their lab. He would
come just completely dejected and they
would just try to pick him back. We we
know you're right. Just stay with but it
affected his health, his life. So these
scientific, you know, debates, they're
never like, "Okay, we were right, you
were wrong." It's this slow moving train
accumulation of evidence. But you know
the yeah the bad luck paper is very
implicit in what it implies that cancer
is caused by genetic mutations that you
have no control over. It's it's cell
regenerate when a cell divides you have
this probability that errors will be
introduced if they are introduced in the
wrong genes cancer. Right? So you look
at that, you look at the data, the data
points to me that are just so compelling
are yeah, you can have those mutations,
you can have them in in healthy cells in
a person that never develops cancer. So
they're never 100% penetrance on any of
these mutations. Number two, when you
look at the data from the cancer genome
atlas project, it does it. No one argues
that mutations are not important to
cancer, right? I think the way you have
to word it is they simp the sematic
mutation theory is not wrong. It is just
not the complete picture. It does not
provide a comprehensive explanation for
what this disease is. And what we
missed, I think, is in my opinion, is we
got so swept up in genetics that this
this idea that there's this library of
Alexander, this DNA with all the
information, and everybody thought that
everything with our health was in that
information. And when they when Clinton
gave the speech of the um the first
rough draft of the human genome project,
you know, it was he was this map will
lead to the diagnosis and cure of all
human disease. And that's what everybody
thought. It was all in the code. What we
didn't appreciate is metabolism, right?
This whirling flux, billions of
reactions that are going on is acting on
that DNA all the time. And that has a
probably a more outsized influence on
health on cancer than the code itself.
And that that that those experiments are
everywhere like the nuclear transfer
experiments we know about. Um yeah, it's
just it's right there in front of
everybody, but they're still stuck on
that. There's so much inertia with that
original theory that, you know, I don't
know if they still believe it or I don't
think all all I think all people do not
believe it now because there's enough
luminaries in the field that have more
or less said it, but they never like say
we were wrong. They just sort of merge
into this new paradigm, right?
>> This episode is brought to you by
Chemotheria Oncology Center. In the
complex world of cancer treatment, it is
crucial to choose a center that doesn't
just aim to attack the tumor, but one
that supports the patient integratively.
At Chemotheria, the commitment is clear.
Expand the paradigms of cancer
treatments with the ultimate goal of
creating a comprehensive treatment
model. A model which supports you while
not just focusing on the tumor.
Chemothers fundamental role of cellular
metabolism in health, an overlooked area
that is attracting increasing attention
across the medical spectrum.
By focusing on cellular metabolism, they
work to balance and support this crucial
system against both the debilitations of
cancer and its treatment, increasing the
patients resilience to both. Because
every individual's metabolism is unique,
chemother believes in a personalized,
integrative and a metabolic approach to
cancer treatment. Their commitment is to
offer treatments tailored for each
patient, ensuring the highest chance of
success. Chemotheria Center, where the
cancer journey is personalized, where
you are supported, and where hope
thrives. Learn more at chemother.com.
That's ch emo t h e r m i a.com.
This episode is brought to you by New
Quadrant Foundation. When you're
navigating the world of health and the
world of finance, it's crucial to have
trusted partners who understand the
bigger picture. That's why I want to
introduce you to one of our cherished
sponsors, New Quadrant. Established in
2010 by one of our amazing Metabolic
Terrain Institute of Health community
members, Louise Stoen, New Quadrant
isn't just another financial entity.
They're a leading fiduciary and family
office service provider in the United
Kingdom with a heart for philanthropy
and a unique focus on promoting wellness
for professional women. And their
mission is to guide their clients so
they can turn aspirations into tangible
charitable goals. But it doesn't end
there. The New Quadrant Foundation, a
beacon of philanthropic endeavors, was
birthed from the very core values of New
Quadrant. The foundation doesn't just
house a part of the business profits. It
radiates the essence of the entire
team's charitable vision. As
establishing UK- based charities evolved
in complexity, New Quadrant Foundation
serves as a guiding light for our
supporters across the pond, directing
funds to worthy causes and ensuring that
your contribution can have the biggest
impact possible. We at the Metabolic
Terrain Institute of Health are humbled
and deeply grateful to have been
beneficiaries of the generosity from
this UK-based charity for years. And for
our United States listeners, if you've
ever wondered about obtaining tax relief
on your donations to a UK foundation,
New Quadrant is your compass. With New
Quadrant, your philanthropic journey is
in caring, capable hands. To learn more,
visit new quadrantpartners.com.
That's ne.com.
>> You know, I think that's like there's
nothing wrong with saying, "Gosh, I
didn't know what I didn't know until I
knew, and now I'm on to something
different." That's not even You don't
even have to say that. It's just
wouldn't it be nice to acknowledge that
we've all learned over time that we're
in this together and that we can also
then be humble in our moments when we
you know when we feel that we are so
certain of something myself included in
this I have to remember these moments
right it's like we we have to come back
to those moments of we're still learning
this is so like I feel like once we have
one answer there's 20 more questions
>> so it's perfect
>> do you mind I think The way you describe
nuclear transfer studies is so elegant
because a lot of people have heard it
maybe have read it especially like in
Tom's book that's a little bit petty
right or seen it in presentations that
even I've given I think you you you
orchestrate it in such an elegant way do
you mind just sharing for the listeners
who may be new to what you mean by this
to what helped another reason thinking
that maybe the somatic mutation genetic
theory of cancer is not the only only
you know only action in town here that
this would compel us to think about this
more terrain ccentric metabolic centric
application. I think the nuclear
transfer studies really highlight that.
Can you tell us?
>> Yeah.
>> No, there's such clear beautiful
experiments, right? And and they're so
there there's experiments where the
conclusion is just it's obvious what it
means. And so if if you're going to ask
this question, what is cancer? What is
driving cancer? Is it the mutations in
the nucleus in the DNA or is it
something in the cytoplasm mitochondria
epigenetic effects right all this
information happening in the cytoplasm
so the experiment was simple and I
interviewed both these guys that did it
William Schaefer in Vermont Jerry Sheay
in Texas and the interesting about thing
about these is both of these guys
expected to see the exact opposite
result. So they were dumb when they got
the result they were absolutely
dumbfounded and they went back and did
these series of controls experiments and
and to make sure that this was the right
result. So what they simply were was
they removed the nucleus of a normal
cell a healthy cell took the nucleus of
a cancer cell and put it into that cell.
So now you have a cancer genome with all
the mutations and a healthy cytoplasm.
They then expanded those cells in a
petri dish and injected them into mice.
not what you'd expect if cancer is a
genetic disease that you'd see cancer in
these mice. It was something like 98% of
them I think actually I think only one
of those mice out of 64 developed
cancer.
>> So that raises okay so what happened
there? So then you flip the experiment.
You take the nucleus of a normal cell
remove the nucleus of the cancer cell
and swap them. Put the healthy nucleus
into this cancerous cell cytoplasm.
Again, you expand the cells, inject them
into mice, and if you would you would
expect not to see cancer if it's driven
by mutations. What happened? Again, it
was in the high 90 percentile of these
mice develop cancer. So, this the you
know, the implications are obvious there
that there's something in the cytoplasm
that is controlling this disease. It's
driving the progression of cancer. And
they couldn't explain it. And they're
like, maybe it's the transfer itself
that's doing this. So they did all these
tight controls where they'd transfer
just take out a cancerous nucleus
transfer back into a cancerous cell and
see and yes you know cancer and vice
versa and they didn't have an
explanation at the time. They just said
it was you know vaguely some epigenetic
effect that we don't understand.
>> And these experiments were lost. Nobody
knew about them. they were just sort of
these curiosities that no one really and
I even brought this up with um I
interviewed him at MIT right who's
another key component of the one of the
key architects of the sematic mutation
theory and he said um he said he said I
don't know about those experiments um
and I said well would you like me to
send them and he said no because if they
were right somebody else would have
noticed
the direct quote yeah
so So you see the you see the sort of
and that the problem with cancer biology
is there's so many studies, right?
Millions and millions. And how do you
sort through all that data and make
sense of it?
>> I love it. It's it's funny today when
you go into the dreaded chat GPT and you
type in how would you describe the
difference between somatic mutation
theory and the you know metabolic theory
of cancer and it really does this is
from 2021. And I don't have the updated
version, so I know that there's more,
but up until 2021, it goes through and
gives me like a three-page little write
up describing the history of the sematic
mutation and all the things you kind of
highlighted just now, as well as the
emerging and and the followup of Otto
Warberg's work and where we are in
today's current current thought
processes. And it even goes into the
nuclear transfer studies in the Cha. It
actually does. And then at the bottom it
has this paragraph that basically is
like but sematic mutation theory is
still the way to go and we're really
completely just ignoring this other
side. So at the end of the day, even
with everything we know, even with a
relatively not successful um war on
cancer, we are still
shouting the same misinformation or not
complete information. And so I'm curious
Travis because you now have been at this
at least since 20101 when you would have
read you know McCar's book and Sever's
book and 2014 all the work you had to do
to get your first book tripping over the
truth out there. So the work and
research you had to do and then the
almost decade since that's been out. How
do you personally see cancer today? How
how would you describe it to your
children, to a stranger on an airplane,
to someone over a you know, at a
cocktail party that knows nothing about
this world?
>> How would I describe cancer as what it
is? What the the cellular process? Okay.
Well,
>> just or how you see it, you know, even
on an esoteric, not necessarily even a
scientific side of things.
>> Okay. I would say that
I'll give you two answers. the the
mechanical answer and then the
philosophical answer. The mechanical
answer, the way I would describe cancer
is it's best described as a metabolic
epigenetic disease and I and I consider
epigenetics and metabolism
woven together very tightly, right? And
and the reason is when you look at what
is h like I'll I'll use one example
right we all describe cancer as through
the is there 11 hallmarks now hallmarks
of cancer
>> I think it's almost I think it's 15 14
or 15 now
>> okay okay
>> and that's the most highly cited paper I
think in cancer biology it's what
putting a face to what cancer is it has
these hallmark features that describe
what it is uncontrolled growth um
rewiring of they call rewiring of
cellular metabolism resistance
resistance of cell death, immortality,
all these characteristics of cancer and
and when you look look at two of those
characteristics and and and according to
somatic mutation theory, all of those
hallmarks are driven by mutations,
right? And keya genes or tumor
suppressor genes. So if we look at one
two of those hallmarks, one is um
rewiring metabolism, so the warberg
effect and the second is uh resistance
of apoptosis or immortality.
We can look at the cancer cell and and
what happens is you see a genetic an
epigenetic shift from metabolism and
epigenetic signaling to the genome where
you switch from one isosyme of
hexocinise to another one. There's four
isoymes. You switch from hexokinase one
to hexokinase 2. Hexocchinise 2 is not
subject to product inhibition. So it
allows glucose to go just go undeterred
down the pathway. So that's why we see
this Warberg effect because there's no
control to it. And number two, it binds
to the VDAC channel which is the voltage
dependent ionic channel that is
responsible for aoptosis.
It closes it. So it immortalizes a cell.
So we have two hallmark features of
cancer described by not mutations but an
epigenetic shift. Can you describe them
by those mutations? No. There's no you
can't descri one one cell might have
mutation ABC one might have ZXY one
might have zero mutations. So to me that
it just blows apart what it is. It it's
a it's a epigenetic metabolic disease.
Philosophically, when I look at cancer,
you look at like systemwide, we're we
spend so much effort trying to cure
stage four cancer.
>> And that's medicine in general where we
watch until a disease is diagnosible and
then we try to treat it. Alzheimer's,
you know, go down the list, everything,
diabetes, your blood glucose is high.
Well, let's try to treat your diabetes.
We've spent so much time doing this when
we should be, you know, going down
upstream and trying to prevent this from
happening because if you there was a
study, I'm sure you know, everyone
quotes I think it was University of
Chicago. If you invented a pill that
cured cancer tomorrow, it would take it
would it would increase human lifespan
by 2.9 years. And and why is that?
Because cancer is predominantly a
disease of aged people, right? And it's
I think it's when you're 50 or over, you
have 90% higher chance of getting
cancer. N 90% compared to someone 24 or
younger. So it's a disease of aging. And
and what happens if you cure cancer? All
of these other age related diseases are
just queued up and waiting, right? So it
it doesn't make So So when I look at the
the systemwide approach to trying the
way we try to treat cancer is just
misguided. we should be going upstream
and trying to how do you keep somebody
from developing cancer, right? What what
can we look at? How do we change this
screening paradigm? How do when can we
incorporate these blood biopsies that
can detect early stage cancer? And if
they say you have stage zero cancer,
what should we do to mitigate your
chance of progressing? So, those are two
different answers from, you know, our
approach to it from a medicine
standpoint and and what the disease is.
I love it and I think that's a really
balanced um review of it and that
actually speaks to a lot of what you
start to tease out in your book curable
which is how an unlikely group of
radical innovators is trying to
transform our health care system. I
think you just spoke to a lot of the
pain points and where we're stuck there.
>> What do you think it's going to take to
change our health care system to start
to take a more proactive preventive
role? Oh boy. I I don't know what
changes in Asia. I you probably have a
better idea of that than I do. This this
I mean it it is such an entrenched
system, right?
>> I I don't know how you change that
system other than I I think slowly over
time the vector of humanity goes in the
right direction and I think we'll get
there and technology will will enhance
that process. Like I said, these these
blood biopsies are getting good. You
know about datar.
>> Yeah. It's like 88% they can detect
stage zero and stage one 88% of the
time. That's pretty profound.
>> Yeah. Now, I would love to introduce you
to one of our sponsors, Hyperbaric
Medical Solutions. They are the leading
provider of hyperbaric oxygen therapy in
the United States, dedicated to helping
patients achieve optimal health by
bringing the revolutionary healing
powers of HBOT. At the helm is Dr. Alan
Katz, a distinguished professional with
double board certifications in emergency
and hyperbaric medicine. With over three
decades in both fields, his leadership
ensures that patients receive nothing
short of excellence. Hyperbaric medical
solutions specializes in the delivery of
hyperbaric oxygen therapy, integrating
other regenerative medicine and
innovative services to fulfill its
mission to enhance patients quality of
life and well-being through personalized
care plans. Do you want to see if
hyperbaric oxygen therapy is right for
you? Take advantage of a free 15minute
information session with one of their
experienced clinicians. Visit
hmsshbot.com.
Travis Christopherson is a captivating
figure at the intersection of science,
research, and the relentless pursuit of
understanding one of humanity's most
formidable adversaries, cancer. With a
passion that borders on obsession,
Christopherson has established himself
as a prominent science writer and a
dedicated researcher, earning widespread
recognition for his unwavering
commitment to exploring the fascinating
realm of metabolic oncology.
In a world inundated with complex
medical jargon and bewildering
scientific breakthroughs, Travis stands
as a beacon of clarity and insight, he
possesses a remarkable ability to
distill intricate concepts into
accessible narratives that resonate with
both experts and lay people alike. His
writing serves as a bridge between the
esoteric world of metabolic science and
the urgent need for innovative cancer
treatments, offering a lifelong, excuse
me, offering a lifeline of understanding
to those grappling with this devastating
disease.
Travis's journey into the world of
metabolic oncology began with a deep
rooted curiosity and a personal
connection to the struggle against
cancer. His quest to unearth
unconventional approaches to cancer
therapy has led him to engage with
cutting edge research, forging a path
that challenges conventional wisdom and
ignites hope for those affected by this
formidable adversary. As a metabolic
oncology enthusiast, Travis's work
transcends mere fascination. It
represents a call to action, an
invitation to explore the tantalizing
possibilities hidden within the complex
metabolic pathways that underline
underly cancer's insidious growth.
Through his writing, his research, and
his unwavering commitment, Travis
empowers us to question the status quo,
inspiring a new era of hope and
innovation in the battle against cancer.
In the following discussion, we'll delve
deep into the remarkable journey of this
science writer and researcher as he
leads us on a captivating exploration of
metabolic oncology's potential to
redefine our understanding of cancer and
to revolutionize its treatment. I want
to introduce you to another one of our
amazing sponsors, Hack Your Health by
Ketocon, which is a conference that
focuses on improving metabolic health
through nutrition and lifestyle. The
event features industry experts who
share research and insights on a variety
of topics including low carb, ketogenic,
and zerocarb diets along with stress
reduction, sleep optimization, gut
health, emotional health, and so much
more. It is an immersive experience that
includes keynote speakers, specialty
panels, breakout sessions, and
interactive activities like the red
light therapies, cold plunge, natural
movement classes, and sauna. And it is a
transformative event that leaves
attendees feeling inspired and
motivated. Hack Your Health will take
place May 31st through June 2nd, 2024 in
Austin, Texas. And as a special treat
for our listeners, they have given us a
discount code that will give you $50 off
of a 3-day general attendee or a 3-day
VIP or a Sunday only expo hall pass.
Just go to www.hackyouhealth.com
and enter the discount code metabolic.
That's me t- a b- o l i. The code is
active now and will remain active until
May 1st, 2024. But don't delay. They
always sell out and you won't want to
miss hackyoualth by KetoCon. Visit
hackyouhealth.com today.
>> So I think the tech will probably drive
I don't know what you think of Ompic and
those type of things if they're going to
be a net benefit to people over time.
>> Well, it's funny. We you know we we
think so because it's targeting the
metabolic process. So, we get kind of
excited thinking, "Oh, here's a pill
that could maybe head this off of the
past, but the side effect profile that
are stacking up." My understanding,
>> and again, we're new to this. We don't
have all the data, but what we're
watching and observing clinically is it
may push back some of the metabolic
drivers, but it's further damaging the
mitochondria
>> in a variety of other ways. And so,
isn't that also how standard of care is
impacting cancer? Yes, you can get some
tumor push back with some aggressive
oxidative therapies, you know, surgery
or excuse me, chemotherapies, radiation
targeted therapies, but you also will
take some, you know, you'll take some
other victims along the way of the
healthy cells and make those um
mitochondria much more vulnerable. So,
the field is still staying vulnerable
and and opportunistic to move into that
space. So, I think our our world just
wants the easy fix. They want the easy
button. They want the pill. They they
hope it's there. But already there's
massive class action lawsuits starting.
I just had a consult right before this
of a woman who um you know basically
almost stroked out from getting on it.
It completely changed all kinds of
things in her physiology and she was you
know she was someone who seemed like the
perfect candidate. 274 pounds, really
struggling to lose that weight, done
everything right in the dietary
lifestyle until we dug deeper. When she
and I dug deeper together, we realized
actually none of the fundamentals had
been dealt with. And so they hadn't even
run her insulin levels. Her insulin was
24.9.
>> O,
>> it's like, you know, so oyic, one of its
side effects is it's going to cause
hyperinsulinemia,
>> which is weird.
>> Oh, I created. It's like a loop back
system.
>> And she never employed things like
intermittent fasting.
>> She'd never employed things like just
um, you know, working on the what she
was eating. She'd made a lot of nice
changes, but she hadn't really
carbohydrate restricted before. She
hadn't really done any intermittent
fasting. She was, you know,
permenopausal post uh post post young
children. So, a lot of her hormonal
things were playing in. She wasn't
sleeping. And if you're not sleeping,
your insulin goes up. Like, no one was
addressing her terrain, right?
>> Yeah.
>> And so, my hope is that if we can
actually look at the whole picture of
these folks, Ozmpic is going to be
obsolete. um and that we can start to
work with them in this field. And that's
where I think um I think is where
western medicine or the the system of
medicine we have currently and to what
you talk about in the curable book. It
is inherently flawed in that it doesn't
allow us the time or the space or the
luxury of doing those deeper dive
explorations. And so, you know, when you
said I don't know, I feel like that's a
really honest answer. I I basically feel
the same way. But what I do know is I've
spent over 25 years in my in my own life
and my own career trying to work within
improve upon and even fix the broken
system. And it just it's so as you said
so deeply entrenched so so deranged in
so many ways that I've just kind of
thrown that idea away and I think we're
just going to go build a new one. So
that's what I'm hoping is these
relationships and these conversations
with you and other thought leaders in
this space. I think that's what we have
to do is start to look at this from
another way. And so when I think about
what you've learned basically, I would
say, wouldn't you say the last 12 years,
this has been your interest? Maybe
longer.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, longer. Yeah. I mean,
I've always been interested in it wasn't
my primary vocation, but yeah, for for
ever since school. Ever since I got out
of school.
>> And what did like we kind of missed that
first part, we jumped right in, but what
was the impetus to start talking about
cancer? Did you have your own story?
>> Well, I've always loved biochemistry and
molecular biology and that was just a
collision of of you know I I needed to
do an independent study class to finish
my masters and I was looking what to do
it on and I ran into Tom's book just
just by random luck. And so that that
was I never thought in a million years
that I' I'd be studying cancer involved
in cancer. I I you know between cancer
and aging those are the two to me the
most fascinating subjects in biology
human biology. Don't they cross in your
opinion? Maybe I should ask this. In
your opinion, do you think that
longevity or the aging process in cancer
really have a a a a mating point?
>> 100%. Yeah. Because what what happens
with aging is and and David Sinclair
coined it the the information theory of
aging. But but it it existed long before
him. There was um Tesshonorf, a Russian
guy, West and Beck, a German guy and an
English guy in the UK. And they coined
this term epigenetic drift a long time
ago, which is when you look at the
epigenome, right, which is just consists
of of markers. So when you think of a
when we think of DNA, we think of it
these two-dimensional strands, but it's
this bound up three-dimensional wrapped
up, you know, I think if you extend it
out, it's like three yards each
chromosome. So it's tightly wound on
histones and it's marked. So we put the
the body will put methylation marks so
the carbon atom on genes to turn them
off. Take that off to turn them on and
it's active. There's erasers and writers
and it's going on all the time. What
happens over time when you're born every
tissue type is perfect fidelity in the
epigenome. So a skin cell is expressing
100% skin related genes and it's
operating beautifully. And as you age
what happens is that epigenome drifts
towards randomness. Stoiicly it drifts.
And so all of a sudden that skin cell is
expressing genes of of the liver or a
neuron that it should not. It becomes
dysfunctional. The cell and when you
look at an you know a human being as it
ages you just see this withering and
dysfunction as it goes on. And that's
what's happening at the level of the
epigenome. So that that where that
collides with cancer is you see this
slow turning off of tumor suppression
and slow turning on of anka genes like
hexocinase 2 over time where that
tipping point happens. You know I think
it takes some some some clinical insults
like a viral infection or something
happening over time which which sort of
locks a cell into that that
proliferation state. But yeah, they're
one and the same. And when you look at
the genome of a cancer cell, it looks
like it's 300 years old. It's it's
locked those that stochiatric drift in
even further and faster as it's, you
know, drifting towards this kind of
randomness towards more proliferative
state. So it it's impossible to separate
the two out. They're they're very very,
you know, they're one is the cause of
the other.
>> Amazing. That's such a visual now that
I'm holding on to here. And you know
that's I I just think about this little
shriveled up the christe and this like
shriveled up you know nuc
cell wall you know the wall around the
mitochondria. It's like wow it does. It
looks like a shriveled raisin.
>> It's depressing isn't it? Yeah
>> it is
dolls we made in grade school.
>> Yeah. We talk we we talk about well we
think about um you know the simplest
stuff like you were talking about is
always the right solution. These
lifestyle changes that are right in
front of anybody can do them and those
the best way to stay healthy is
obviously this a great lifestyle. Um, I
just wonder how far the the thrust in
aging right now is this idea that you
can actually manipulate the cell to
deaging itself through Yamanaka
factor expression. Right? So there may
be this intrinsic hack in every cell
that if you activate it, you can
activate the program of of
fertilization. when you take um when you
take two cells and you create an embryo,
what happens there is the epigenome is
wiped clean and reinstalled. So you take
say two 40-year-olds that that um that
that have a baby that they're going to
take those 40-year-old cells genomes and
completely rewire them. It turns out you
can hack that process in every single
cell in DA and that's the thrust of
anti-aging research is in that arena.
There's Altos Labs. Have you heard of
that?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, it's always billionaires
that wanna want to fund this kind of
stuff because they want to live forever.
>> Yeah. So, they they've hired the sort of
the luminaries in the field that are
doing this and and the goal is just see
if you can do this.
>> Amazing. Amazing. Well, that's a really
good segue to I mean you you clearly are
gifted with word, gifted with teaching,
sharing, passionate about setting up a
foundation to do more and more research
in this area. It sounds like one of your
areas of passion right now is in sort of
the longevity anti-aging space, but I
know you're working on a few projects
simultaneously as you do. What is really
lighting you up right now? What are you
very excited about that you're currently
working on?
>> Yeah. So, so one interesting story is if
if whoever has read Tripping Over the
Truth, if you've read that book, there's
a story of Dr. Young co who fell into
this lab of Peter Peterson who is the
one who took the torch from Warberg and
and he says you know I was the only one
working in the field and that may be
true um of this idea that cancer was
metabolic in nature and so in that lab
they were trying to figure out how to
target through metabolism and she came
up with this idea of this small molecule
drug that could enter selectively into
the pores that allow lactic acid to
escape because they're upregulated on
cancer cells. And it it out came this
molecule 3 bromo pyuvate that initially
showed absolutely incredible promise,
right? I mean it was stunning. It had an
article in the Baltimore Sun. Um then a
patent dispute happened that really
derailed this process of good PR and you
fast forward to now and what happened
was she she did have funding but the
company imploded. They were just
starting to treat the first patients in
the trial, but she's shephered the drug
to this, it's IND enabled by the FDA. A
clinical team is set up. It's absolutely
ready to go. And when you look at this
drug in my opinion, you know, cancer
drugs preclinally when you're trying to
decide what should go on to clinical
trials, it's just a comparative process.
What is every mouse model is different.
So, you're just sort of comparing the
data. This drug looks absolutely
incredible. You know, it could be a
gamecher in cancer. The funding is the
difficult part because she's a oneman
band at the moment. So, so anybody
interested in this, the company is
called Primo Cure and
>> Primo Cure. Yeah.
>> Perfect.
>> Yeah.
>> And this is my understanding is she's
also because there are some people you
alluded to earlier that are trying to
take the patent or block her patent or
even make get this get to the finish
line before her even though it's her
work and her brilliance. this
unfortunately is not the first time this
has happened in the scientific space and
definitely unfortunately not the first
time it's happened to her. Um I'm
interested in that you have shared with
me that she's even taken it to a whole
another level sort of a more of a novel
delivery of it and sort of a re I don't
know like repurposing of it is that
would that be appropriate description
and she's taken it to a less toxic um
way.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. It's it's a it's a really reactive
molecule and most of the biochemists
have looked at initially is like don't
even touch it. It's not going to go
anywhere. It's too reactive. So what her
art was and she's brilliant. I mean
she's a biophysicist and a biochemist
which I think she got her degree both of
them in two year or three years. Um but
what she did was she it's the
formulation the combination of buffers
the manufacturing that that take it from
this you know overly reactive molecule
to this molecule that potentially could
be therapeutic and and that has taken
her literally you know 20 years of her
life.
>> We are so grateful for the support from
the hypothermia cancer institute at HCI.
They understand the struggle and fear
that comes with a cancer diagnosis but
they also believe in offering hope and
cutting edge therapy to their patients.
Imagine a treatment that not only
statistically increases the success rate
of other cancer therapies, but also
comes with virtually no side effects.
Hypothermia does just that. It's a
beacon of hope for those navigating the
arduous journey of cancer treatment.
Studies have shown that hypothermia
stimulates the immune system, giving
your body an additional ally in the
fight against cancer, helping you to
regain health, vitality, and peace of
mind. Located in the heart of Los
Angeles, the Hyperothermia Cancer
Institute specializes in the
administration of non-invasive localized
hypothermia therapy using FDA approved
advanced ultrasound technology. This
innovative treatment targets cancer
cells with precision, delivering heat
that enhances the effectiveness of both
radiation therapy and chemotherapy. At
the Hypothermia Cancer Institute, you're
not just a patient. You're a valued
individual deserving the utmost advanced
and compassionate care available. Join
the many who have turned a fearful
diagnosis into a story of survival and
hope. Discover the difference that
hypothermia therapy can make in your
cancer treatment journey. Visit the
Hypothermia Cancer Institute online at
hconcology.com.
hc
ly.com
or call 888-580-5900
to schedule a consultation. You know,
Travis, one of the things I love about
you is you're just so humble in your
heart and soul, and you're just so
committed to um seeing everybody thrive,
and you don't seem to have a an
antagonistic or a competitive bone in
your body. And I really love that you
play so well in this metabolic space.
And I think that you're a really good
ally for somebody like Dr. Co to help
get her brilliance into the world. and
we know we're actively trying to find
resources to help her get this trial off
the ground. Anybody else listening, we'd
love to see this happen. We have so many
ideas of how her therapy could be
integral to the way we in the MTI
community approaches cancer and would
love to see this as standard of care.
So, I really really am grateful that
this is one of your passion projects
right now. And are you doing a lot of
that fundraising through your
foundation? Can you tell us a little bit
about your foundation? Yeah. No, the the
foundation's separate from that. That'll
be whoever wants to vent and premature
that'll be a you know, whoever is
interested in cancer venture capital,
whoever philanthropics, organizations,
we just don't have enough to get the
phase one trial. I think you need about
seven million. Y
>> which is not, you know, in the scope of
cancer drugs, that's not a lot. And with
this drug, you you could see fasttrack
from phase one. But the foundation we
focus on um you know the mission there
is just cancer research. So we fund
projects that look at everything you do,
the combinations of therapies that might
be most efficacious from mice to to
leaving the bench to going to the
bedside. What should we bring forward in
combinations? Um a lot of the work we
fund is in Tom Safrey's lab, you know,
and he's very focused on this idea of
cancer fuels, eliminating cancer fuels
or reducing them, glucose and glutamine.
And he's had some, you know, absolutely
outstanding results. So yeah, that's a
lot of pre-clinical work. We've done
some age aging funding. Um that's one of
those things too that I just had no idea
that would that would people would
actually come and fund. We've had some
absolutely wonderful philanthropic
people make donations and so that's been
a lot of fun.
>> I love it. I love it. So Travis, now
that you're you've got like famous kids
like training for Olympics and you know
random things like that. You're still
riding. You're helping Dr. co bring her
dream forward and and hopefully change,
you know, cancer care as we know it.
Helping Dr. Seaff Freed bring his dream
forward. You're even on our board and
helping us bring our dream forward.
Where what is your dream? What what are
you and your wife up to now? I'm I'm
like I'm really curious to see what the
two of you, these beautiful beings that
you have brought into the world are off
now living your own world. What does the
next phase of your life look like?
>> That's a beautiful question. You know,
I've tried to organize my life to where
I don't to eliminate stress because I
had a lot of I I worked really hard to
get to a point where I knew I'd be okay
and then I don't have to have dogs in
the fight and every like like you said,
I don't have to worry about I can just
be I I mostly go where I'm most
interested, where I see the most
promise. Like I'm able to help Dr. Co
with this drug or the foundation's
research, whatever that, you know, the
most interesting things are I can I can
pursue. But I'm I'm grateful and lucky
that I've been able to organize, you
know, my life like that. Yeah. And my
kids Yeah. They my my sons are like
>> Drag on him.
>> Yeah. He's he it's like a Wes Anderson
movie. This just child, my boy was was
like,
>> you know, computer games and he was a
yo-yo competitor. We drove him around to
yo-yo competitions, not baseball, not
football, soccer. He was like he was a
regional runner up in 2A in in the
Minneapolis championship. And so out of
nowhere he starts training and becomes
this beast and now he's the number one
push athlete on on the USA bobsled team.
And he's he's uh going to do the World
Cup again this year and then the
Olympics are in Italy in 2026. My
daughter is this just wonderfully
brilliant biochemist straight A's at
Montana State. So yeah, just, you know,
watching them develop and being part of
that is is incredibly rewarding. But
that's it. Other than that, my life is
very simple and boring.
>> I love your simple, boring life. It is
definitely not simple and boring to me.
I could just like listen for hours to
the things in your brain. And so in a
closing note, I want to know what if any
daily practices you do to manage,
maintain, and create metabolic health.
>> Yeah. Good. Great. I'm hung up on on
ketosis and I hope it's one of the right
answers. I am just fascinated by that
physiology and what that does. And you
can't it is so many elegant things
happen from that simple molecule beta
hydroxybutyrate that it cannot be a
coincidence, right? Um it's a different
fuel. It's an epigenetic signaler. It
blocks the formation of inflammatory
complexes. So I just try to maintain
ketosis and I don't do it in any
religious fashion. I I try to I kind of
do it seasonally like I'll bounce in and
out for most of the winter and then um
the summertime I might be in it less but
I I and I don't know the right answer
for people to do it continuously or
should it be done through fasting. Um I
think you just go by feeling you know
what what do I feel best doing?
>> And so that's my main that's my main
thing and then it's just lifestyle. It's
good sleep of course stress and being
engaged. You know, the number one, I'm
sure you know, when you look at the data
from epidemiological data, one of the
number one health predictors is uh close
relationships
>> and social engagement. So, just being
involved is is the signaling that comes
through that is is fascinating. It
affects everything from your metabolism
to inflammation, everything.
>> I love it. I think you actually just
spoke very specifically to my version of
the CDC, which is circadian rhythm. So
you tipped off about the importance of
sleep, diet or lack thereof. So the
importance of therapeutic ketosis and
the way you eat your food, the way you
fuel your body, and the final C,
community and connection. So
>> you're living you're you're the living
testament to my CDC. So I love that. And
for folks who want to learn more about
these powerful little signaling
molecules, um Travis, is was this your
second or your third book? I think it
was your second book.
>> That was the third book.
>> It was okay. So, ketones, the fourth
fuel, warberg to Krebs to Vich, the
250-year journey to find the fountain of
youth. Really interesting. So, a lot of
people are like, "Ah, this is a fad.
It's these things." I just I hope you
read this book to realize that it is
not. It is what we were literally um
created to be able to do naturally and
we can help harness that energy in
really beautiful ways. And Travis is a
really good example of that and the
offspring that he's created
in the sound of it. We can all um try to
be amazing, talented yo-yo um people in
the world with our ketosis parents. So
Travis, you are just an absolute angel
on earth for all that you do to bring so
much to support so many and we are
incredibly grateful for your time, your
wisdom, your humor, your compassion, and
your humility. And I hope we get to have
more conversations in the future. Oh,
thanks, Nisha. This has been fun. It's
It's about time you do this because I
knew you'd be you'd be brilliant at
being a podcast host.
>> A all the best. Thank you. Thank you.
>> Thank you for joining us for this
episode of Metabolic Matters. We hope
you found today's conversation
insightful and empowering.
As we wrap up today's episode, we want
to take a moment to acknowledge the
incredible team and supporters who make
this podcast possible.
First, we'd like to thank our production
team, Alex Sanchez, Cindy Kennedy,
Jessica Gilman, and Lynn Hughes for
their hard work behind the scenes. Our
theme song was written by Julie Newark
and performed by Whiskey Flower. And
finally, we want to thank you, our
listeners, for tuning in and being a
part of the Metabolic Matters community.
Do you want to learn more? Please visit
our website metabolicmatters.org
and you can follow us on Instagram. If
you liked this episode, please leave us
a review and share it with your friends
and family.
And if you want to help support our
mission spreading awareness and
knowledge about metabolic health, reach
out. We'd love you to join with us.
Also, don't forget to subscribe to our
channel and hit the notification bell to
stay updated on upcoming episodes. We
have so much exciting content coming
your way. Until next time, stay curious,
stay empowered, and remember, your
metabolic health matters.